---
title: YOU DIED. Would You Rather Not?
game: Old-School Essentials
desc: >
    This article suggests an alternative method for handling damage in D&D that
    involves players engaging with the process of taking damage and recognizing
    that each attack is not equal. This helps convey the idea that damage is
    abstract in the game, and helps mitigate ludonarrative dissonance.
author: Lucille L. Blumire
originalTitle: YOU DIED... Would You Rather Not? Old School Musings on Hit Point Narrative Resolution
originalURL: https://llblumire.co.uk/you-died-would-you-rather-not-old-school-musings-on-hit-point-narrative-resolution/
date: 2020-03-12T12:53
image: '/asset/you-died.jpg'
tags: post
---

## You Died. Would You Rather Not?

Ludonarrative dissonance refers to when the narrative and gameplay of a game
contradict each other. This is common in tabletop adventure games, especially
in the many versions of Dungeons & Dragons. Hit points in these games can cause
ludonarrative dissonance, as a high-level character may be able to survive
multiple attacks that would kill a low-level character. This can be
particularly noticeable in the OSR, although it is not as extreme as in 5th
edition due to characters having reduced HP.

This raises the question of how to incorporate the gameplay mechanic of hit
points into the narrative of the game. One option is to describe each attack as
potentially lethal and have the higher-level character endure more of them.
However, game masters often just state the amount of damage taken without
addressing it within the narrative, possibly for the sake of convenience or due
to the inconsistency with the story.

> **DM:** You are hit for seven points of damage.

The AD&D 1st edition Dungeon Master's Guide suggests ideas for handling combat
in the "Encounters, Combat, and Initiative" section.

> Damage scored to characters or certain monsters is actually not substantially
> physical — a mere nick or scratch until the lost handful of hit points are
> considered—it is a matter of wearing away the endurance, the luck, the
> magical protections.
>
> &mdash;AD&D Dungeon Master's Guide

As well as the above the Dungeon Master's Guide recommends interpreting combat
as taking place over a period of time, with multiple attacks and defenses
occurring before a potentially lethal blow is dealt. This is why combat in AD&D
is divided into 1-minute rounds, during which multiple attacks may be made. In
OSE, rounds are 10 seconds long, which allows for multiple attacks but may not
justify multiple potentially lethal blows. However, it can be easy to forget to
incorporate this into the narrative of the game, especially during long combat
with many attacks being exchanged.

The solution I am experimenting with follows the pattern given in this title:
"You died, would you rather not?"

This method borrows from story games like Ten Candles and allows players to
describe their own successes in the game. The process involves describing the
intent of the attacking creature and the damage the player must take (or
rolling for it), then allowing the player to narrate their response as they see
fit. The game master can approve the narration or provide an alternative if
necessary. This approach helps players adapt to the idea that not all damage is
physical harm and allows for more natural storytelling in the game.

1.  Describe the lethal intent of the attacking creature and inform the players of the damage they must take \[or simply roll it for them\].
2.  \[Allow the player to roll this damage\], and narrate as they feel appropriate.
3.  Approve the narration (by moving on), or quickly provide an alternative if you feel they overstepped.

This change in narrative control helps players quickly adapt to the idea that
not all damage is physical harm and makes the transition feel natural. Consider
the following examples. First before this transition of narrative control.

> **DM:** "you bash the goblins dagger out of the way, take 3 damage."
>
> **Player:** "from what, you said I bashed the dagger out of the way."
>
> **DM:** "the process of bashing."
>
> **Player:** "?"

And then after the transition of narrative control.

> **DM:** "The goblin plunges it's dagger directly into your heart. You die...
> would you rather not?"
>
> **Player:** "Uhhh sure?"
>
> **DM:** "How do you avoid the goblins dagger? taking only d4 damage instead,
> keep in mind how close to future death the dagger is making you."
>
> **Player:** \[rolls d4: 2\] "Umm, I'm left on 1 hp, so I guess I'm able to
> move so the dagger only goes between my lower ribs, instead of killing me."
>
> **DM:** "Alright, next up..."

This process of describing how damage is lethal and then avoided should not be
repeated each time damage is dealt. It can be used as an introduction for each
player and then, once they are used to it, they can narrate their own harm
avoidance as they see fit.

> **DM:** "The goblin plunges it's dagger towards your heart for 1d4 damage."
> 
> **Player:** \[rolls d4: 3\] "I bash the dagger away with my shield, losing 3
> hit points."

The character in the above example is a level 9 fighter, and so those three
damage put them in much less harms way than the low level magic-user from our
previous examples. As such, they describe the combat as far less impactful.

This system also allows either the game master or the player to roll damage.

> **DM:** "The goblin plunges it's dagger towards your heart for" \[rolls d4:
> 3\] "three damage."
>
> **Player:** "I bash the dagger away with my shield."

This system also allows for a new phrase that the game master can use when a
player is reduced to zero hit points: "How do you want to die today?" This
allows the player to narrate their own epic and heroic demise in the way they
wish. This idea was inspired by Matthew Mercer's popular phrase "How do you
want to do this?" for defeating monsters. This lets players craft the epic
death scenes their characters deserve.

Some people might argue that armor class and hit points are different because
armor class represents a player's ability to avoid harm through dexterity,
armor, or a shield, while hit points represent physical wounds. However, the
advice in the AD&D 1st edition Dungeon Master's Guide suggests a different
perspective. Armor class can be seen as a measure of an enemy's ability to fail
to harm the player, while hit points represent the player's ability to avoid
death.
