---
title: Announcing Horizon. Horizon is dead.
date: 2023-01-09T17:00
author: Lucille L. Blumire
desc: >
    The planned announcement of RPG Horizon takes a significant setback in the
    light of recent legal developments. This article explains the situation,
    what my hopes were, and where things will go from here.
game: Industry news
image: '/asset/graves.jpg'
tags: ['post']
---

## Announcing Horizon. Horizon is dead.

It had been my intention, this week, to announce RPG Horizon. A new piece of
software which I hoped could change the way Old-School Essentials, and other
OSR tabletop roleplaying games, were played online.

The projects intention was to bring five things to OSE.

 1. A digital character sheet for players.
 2. A searchable rules reference (similar to the SRD).
 3. Online campaign management tools for referees.
 4. Live session play tools for procedure automation.
 5. A content store for paid expanded content.

The plan was to launch in Q3 of this year, with all of the content available
purely on the OGL through the OSE SRD hosted and ready to go. In short, one
would be able to play a full game of Basic D&D, as was done in the 80s, with
fully automated character sheets, campaign information, and automated tools to
help the referee stay organised as they follow the procedures for wilderness
adventuring, waterborne adventuring, dungeon adventuring, encounters, and
combat.

Then, after that release, I would reach out to Necrotic Gnome and third party
content authors, hoping to bring the paid content they have created into the
Horizon Ecosystem, adding classes and systems from various third party products
to the system such that buying them would give you automated character sheets
for any classes, integrated systems for any new procedures, and would add any
new rules to your own personal SRD library.

### What Changed

To explain what changed, I'm going to need to give a quick history lesson.

Before the year 2000, Dungeons & Dragons was owned by a company called TSR.
While this company did create my favourite version of the game (The 1981 Basic
Set), it was also extremely litigious. It would send threatening legal notices
to anyone who it peceived was infringing on it's IP, even though in many of
these cases the usage in question was fully within fair use, or was not something
that TSR could make a reasonable claim to.

In the year 2000, after Dungeons & Dragons was purchased by Wizards of the
Coast (WOTC), they laid down a peace offering to the community. The OGL 1.0 was
released, an open gaming license that enabled anyone to make third party content
for D&D, and removed the threat of litigation that loomed over the community under
TSR.

The creation of the license was spearheaded by Ryan Dancey, who at the time was
Vice President of WOTC. In an interview he stated the following:

> I think there's a very, very strong business case that can be made for the
> idea of embracing the ideas at the heart of the Open Source movement and
> finding a place for them in gaming. [...] One of my fundamental arguments is
> that by pursuing the Open Gaming concept, Wizards can establish a clear
> policy on what it will, and will not allow people to do with its copyrighted
> materials. Just that alone should spur a huge surge in independent content
> creation that will feed into the D&D network.

The move was successful, and the third party publishing industry flourished.

In 2006, Stuart Marshall would attempt to push the boundaries of the OGL. They
released OSRIC. The Old School Reference and Index Compilation. This was a game
that attempted to use the framework of the open gaming license to reconstruct
1st Edition D&D. The IP for this edition was owned by WOTC, and the creation of
OSRIC tested if they would consider this infringement and outside the terms set
out by the OGL. Fortunately, WOTC did not take action against Stuart Marshall,
and the Old-School Scene D&D scene blossomed into the state it is in today. All
built in the safe harbour of the OGL.

It has been raised by many, that the OGL is not strictly needed for much of what
the OSR movement does. You cannot copyright game mechanics, and most OGL games do
not use any of the text which is expressly present within the Open Game Content
released by wizards of the coast. This does not prevent a full picture however,
as most creating under the OGL did not do so because they were required to, but
instead did so to take advantage of the safe harbour it provided. A clear
precedent had been established by WOTC: create under the OGL, and we wont sue
you.

People felt safe and secure under this license, because of two clauses present
within the license, and an FAQ statement put out by Wizards of the Coast.

> 4\. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this
> License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty-­free,
> non-­exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open
> Game Content.

> 9\. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish
> updated versions of this License. You may use any authorized version of this
> License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally
> distributed under any version of this License.

> Q: Can't Wizards of the Coast change the License in a way that I wouldn't
> like?
>
> A: Yes, it could. However the License already defines what will happen to
> content that has been previously distributed using an earlier version, in
> Section 9. As a result, even if Wizards made a change you disagreed with, you
> could continue to use an earlier, acceptable version as your own option. In
> other words, there is no reason for Wizards to ever make a change that the
> community of people using the Open Gaming License would object to, because
> the community would just ignore the change anyway.


These two clauses provided security. The OGL was here to stay, and was never
going to be taken away. Even games that did not rely on any of WOTC's
intellectual property began using it, treating it as a well tested open source
license for roleplaying games. In addition to this, the license was set up in
such a way that even if WOTC did update it, they would be able to continue
using the old OGL 1.0. The content published using it was safe, and the
businesses built up around creating this content were secure.

The text of the OGL 1.1 has been leaked. Coming over 20 years after the original
OGL was released to the public.

It contains the following.

> This agreement is, along with the OGL: Commercial, an update to the
> previously available OGL 1.0(a), which is no longer an authorized license
> agreement.

This term attempts to strip power away from clause 9, using the fact that the
original clause 9 contained the term "any authorized version". It is my belief,
that when that clause was written, this was intended to mean any version which
had been completed and released (as distinct from drafts), and was a historic
status applied to a release of the OGL, and thus not an ongoing status which
could be revoked at a later date.

This perspective is backed up by Ryan Dancey who has said the following since
the leak.

> My public opinion is that Hasbro does not have the power to deauthorize a
> version of the OGL. If that had been a power that we wanted to reserve for
> Hasbro, we would have enumerated it in the license. I am on record numerous
> places in email and blogs and interviews saying that the license could never
> be revoked.

In addition to this, Monte Cook, who was a Senior Game Designer at WOTC when
the OGL was released, has said the following.

> I was there was[sic] the original OGL was created. I know first hand how hard
> those drafting it tried to sincerely make it so that it would last forever
> and would never screw over anyone that used it.

Thus, it seems to me that the terminology used in the new OGL is overreach, and
something that will eventually be torn down by a court. Unfortunately, I do not
have the money to fight Hasbro over this. Very few companies do.

This means, for all practical purposes, if the leaked documents are released
unchanged, that the OGL 1.0 can no longer be used. This means that Horizon is
dead.

I could not accept OGL 1.1, for it is a horrific license with a terrible deal
for anyone other than WOTC. In addition, it contains some clauses that may mean
one could not use it to reproduce content from editions of D&D released by TSR,
and so would not be usable for OSE and OSE based content even if one did accept
its other awful terms. It also cannot be used for anything other than PDF and
print publications, which RPG Horizon is not.

### The Way Forward

If the OGL 1.1 releases as leaked, then I am unable to continue the development
of Horizon along its current course. The OSE SRD is no longer a platform I can
use, as the OGL 1.0 is no longer usable. There is no timeline on when Necrotic
Gnome may release a non OGL version of the OSE SRD, and this would likely be a
significant undertaking due to how tightly coupled OSE is with D&Ds
intellectual property. There is no other game with a similar market position to
OSE, having a wide audience and a large scale of popularity, with consistent
third party publication support, which could sustain a project such as Horizon.
Neither do I have the inroads or working relationship with any other publisher
as I do with necrotic gnome.

In order to replace OSE, a game would need to:

 1. Have a large enough commercial base to support development on a fraction of
    the games audience. (OSE pulled $700k at last kickstarter.)
 2. Have an open license under which a free tier of service could be developed
    and made available. (OSE had the OGL).
 3. Have a company willing to sit down and negotiate future content
    monetization and publication. (I had not yet done this with OSE, but have a
    good relationship with its Author and no doubt he would be willing.)
 4. Have a thriving third party content community creating constant releases
    and proving the game as an evergreen one. (OSE had this through the OGL and its
    specific third party license).

I have been working on Horizon for 2 years. Most of that work has been in
infrastructure, architecture, and design. The final three quarters of development
this year were going to focus on bringing in the OSE specific content. This is
something I can no longer do, and so realistically the three following options are
available.

 1. Find a game with a scale similar to OSE that Horizon could build around.
 2. Stall development of Horizon until after the "no longer an authorized
    agreement" wording is overturned in a court. Which is not guarunteed.
 3. Stall development of Horizon until after OSE releases a non OGL version,
    which is not guaranteed to happen and would be a significant time
    investment to complete.

I am presented with three bad options.

If you are the developer of a game that believes it could fill the shoes of
OSE, please reach out to me at `ogl-update@rpghorizon.com`. I was hoping to
expand Horizon beyond OSE eventually, to encompass a larger range of TTRPGs
building off the technologies and infrastructure I had created for OSE, so this
is something I am prepared to do. I had simply hoped that I could launch with a
stronger foundation in a game I personally love.

### What Can Be Done

I will personally be pledging to support any company which attempts to fight
WOTC in court over the wording of the new license in any way I am able.

I would encourage you, the reader, to stop purchasing any property owned by
Hasbro. Any funds you give them may directly contribute to destroying the
livelihoods of independent creators.

Further to this, if it is possible for your group, convert away from a system
that Hasbro controls into an alternative. There are thousands of TTRPGs out
there, and word of mouth marketting is the most powerful tool most have for
growth.

I would also encourage the signing of open petitions, such as the one organised
by Mike Holik of Mage Hand Press at
[opendnd.games](https://www.opendnd.games/).

I hope the OSE and broader TTRPG scene can weather the storm. If you are a
fellow creator, I wish you luck. If you are a consumer, please wish us all
luck.

Horizon is more than just a digital toolkit, so is not dead  in its entirety.
The news, reviews, and discussion components of this project will continue with
no disruption for now. It is still my intention to post blog posts discussing
TTRPGs, and eventually to launch a [youtube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/@Horizon-RPG) providing similar content in an
audio-visual format. It is simply that the raison d'être of the project can no
longer be.
